feat(package-json): add `dependencyUniqueness` rule (#2746)
flint-fyi/flint: packages/site/src/content/docs/rules/package-json/dependencyUniqueness.mdx

---
description: "Reports dependency names that are declared more than once in package.json."
title: "dependencyUniqueness"
topic: "rules"
---

import { Tabs, TabItem } from "@astrojs/starlight/components";
import { RuleEquivalents } from "~/components/RuleEquivalents";
import RuleSummary from "~/components/RuleSummary.astro";

<RuleSummary plugin="package-json" rule="dependencyUniqueness" />

This rule reports dependency names that are repeated in the same `package.json` dependency collection.

> For consistency with `eslint-plugin-package-json`, it also reports dependency names that appear in `devDependencies` or `peerDependencies` when they are already declared in `dependencies`.

Reviewer: [Question] Can you explain this? Would we not want this independently?

IMO we don't need to maintain consistency with any existing plugins/rules just for the sake of it. But if there's a good reason behind why they behave the way they do, we can go with that reason.

Author: IMO, this rule should covers dependency name uniqueness at the manifest-semantics level, not only duplicate keys inside one object.

A dependency repeated from `dependencies` into `devDependencies` is redundant. A dependency repeated from `dependencies` into `peerDependencies` mixes direct ownership with host-provided ownership.

Reviewer 2: I don't think Josh was arguing that the feature should or shouldn't be included, but rather that when we're documenting it, we should explain it based solely on its value as a feature, rather than saying we're including it for consistency with another plugin.  Basically a version of what you just said could be swapped in here. 😊

Reviewer: Yup, exactly!

## Examples

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="❌ Incorrect">

```json
{
	"dependencies": {
		"left-pad": "^1.3.0",
		"left-pad": "^1.3.0"
	}
}
```

```json
{
	"dependencies": {
		"left-pad": "^1.3.0"
	},
	"devDependencies": {
		"left-pad": "^1.3.0"
	}
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="✅ Correct">

```json
{
	"dependencies": {
		"left-pad": "^1.3.0"
	},
	"devDependencies": {
		"vitest": "^4.0.0"
	}
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## When Not To Use It

> If your package intentionally repeats dependency names across dependency collections, such as to mirror a runtime dependency into `peerDependencies`, you can disable this rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your package intentionally repeats dependency names across dependency collections, such as to mirror a runtime dependency into `peerDependencies`, this rule might not be for you.
Doing so is generally unnecessary with most mainstream package managers, but other tooling might add in the need to do so.
```

## Further Reading

- [npm: `package.json` > `dependencies`](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v11/configuring-npm/package-json#dependencies)
- [npm: `package.json` > `peerDependencies`](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v11/configuring-npm/package-json#peerdependencies)

> - [eslint-plugin-package-json: `unique-dependencies`](https://github.com/michaelfaith/eslint-plugin-package-json/blob/HEAD/docs/rules/unique-dependencies.md)

Reviewer: [Docs] This is already covered by `RuleEquivalents`.

```suggestion
```
